+++
title = "The next generation of SaaS won't optimize for user engagement"
date = "1990-03-29"
draft = true
tags = [
    "SaaS",
    "UX"
]
+++

- TODO: http://www.7wdata.be/software-as-a-service/the-next-generation-of-saas-wont-optimize-for-user-engagement/

# The next generation of SaaS won't optimize for user engagement

A few weeks ago Hiten Shah explained in a new interesting post why the most
successful SaaS companies of the future will focus on usage, just like Facebook.
In the write-up, he goes very deep into his explanation bringing examples of
world-class SaaS companies like Trello, Slack, and Dropbox that are all building
their strategies around this consumer-oriented product approach.

He predicts that this is how the next generation of SaaS will look like.

While I was reading Hiten’s post, I immediately recalled a frugal email
conversation I had last month with Patrick Campbell, CEO at Price Intelligently.

Patrick briefly introduced me to the definition of what he calls “anti-active
usage” products.

While at first, this might sound very counterintuitive, it’s actually the
natural evolution of most of the SaaS products that we know today.

Harnessing the world of software is a single statement is very hard. Tom Tunguz
explained in a post on the blog his vision about software in a simple way.

Software world divides into systems of record and workflow applications.

Systems of record unify data from different sources under a single view. Common
applications of Systems of record are CRM and ERP.

Here’s how the value chain for systems of record looks like:

Read Also: Is your company data-driven? workflow applications enable workers to
do work. These products represent a huge portion of the products that we use in
our daily work life.

Here’s the value chain for workflow applications:

Systems of records and workflow applications have one thing in common, at their
core level they need some human interactions.

The paradigm under which you have to actively use something to do a given task
or to reach a certain goal is the bedrock of most of the SaaS products out
there.

Anti-active usage products flip this model— you don’t necessarily need to use
the product to get something done because the product (1) understands the
problem, (2) works out a solution and (3) outputs a result. Anti-active usage
products don’t need human interactions at any level of their value-chain.

We can expect in 10 years from now, a good part of today’s SaaS product flocking
to this new category:

There are many reasons I see why anti-active SaaS products might come in the
next 10 years:

1. The scarcity of time — We can build a solid business strategy around things
   that are stable in time. This is why we create businesses on things that
   don’t change. Time is the scarcest resource and your employees’ time is one
   of the most important assets of your business. Products that don’t impact by
   any means on your team but yet they are able to generate relevant outcomes,
   can change the rules of the game.

Read Also: Journey Science in Telecom: Take Customer Experience to the Next
Level

2. The tragedy of the commons — The tragedy of the commons is an economic theory
   of a situation within a shared resource System where individual users acting
   independently according to their own self-interest behave contrary to the
   common good of all users by depleting or spoiling that resource through their
   collective action. The “individual users” in this instance are the SaaS
   vendors who are all trying to optimize for engagement/product usage. The
   reliance on this model is not only unsustainable but is demonstrably damaging
   the environment.

3. SaaS switching cost — The tool explosion I’ve been talking about for a while
   made companies more flexible, but it also made people waste time jumping back
   and forth between apps just to accomplish a given task. Not to mention the
   lack of context they need to do good work. This SaaS tools explosion broke
   your work into tiny pieces and scattered it across a dozen apps — making it
   almost impossible to feel on top of things. Anti-active usage products slash
   the switching costs between products and tools in our workday and centralize
   the metrics of their output in a single dashboard. These products allow you
   and your team to concentrate more on a strategic and on a tactic level.
