+++
title = "Four ways AI will transform the field service industry"
date = "1990-03-29"
draft = true
tags = [
    "Artificial Intelligence",
    "Service"
]
+++

- TODO: https://venturebeat.com/2017/07/22/4-ways-ai-will-transform-the-field-service-industry/

# Four ways AI will transform the field service industry

For better or worse, technology has taught us that we shouldn’t have to wait
anymore. We can access the news instantly, wherever we are, on our mobile
devices. We can watch a favorite movie on demand via Netflix or another
streaming service. “One-click purchase” represents the amount of time it takes
to buy. In fact, the ease and speed of ecommerce has gotten to the point that
it’s practically a national holiday.

So why are we still being asked to wait at home between noon and 5:00 p.m. for
someone to show up and figure out why our ice maker is out, why the cable
refuses to pull up HBO, or why our exercise bike is on fire? Why hasn’t field
service caught up to the rest of the world?

One answer is that the industry hasn’t adopted the kind of technology that will
improve speed, accuracy, and reliability. If field-service reps could
communicate with the equipment they’re sent out to repair, they wouldn’t have to
come in unprepared, assess the situation, and then begin work — all of which
slows the whole process down and ensures that a five-hour window is often as
accurate as it gets.

Enter the Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI). IoT
promises that field-service reps will be able to talk to machines to quickly
identify issues, and AI promises to make reps aware of problems before they even
appear. Let’s look at four areas where AI and IoT will change the industry.

1. Image recognition

AI will use image recognition to streamline the service process, whether that’s
break-fix, preventative maintenance, or installations. AI can help the
technician identify parts needed for repair and order them, or record what parts
were consumed as part of the work order and automatically put in an order to
replenish them. This is currently a notoriously error-prone process, but that
could change. As field service is closely involved in fixing or replacing parts
at the customer’s home or office, image recognition has huge potential to
increase the field rep’s accuracy throughout the asset service life cycle.

2. Technician guidance

Businesses today want to be prescriptive about what their technicians do at
every step of the work order — not just for compliance reasons, but for training
and safety, too. It can be laborious for a company to stay current with new
developments in the field. By using AI to analyze what technicians typically do
for a certain type of work, for a certain type of customer, at a particular
step, given a particular asset, AI can develop a set of best practices to guide
future technicians through those same situations. This guided experience helps
technicians get their work done more efficiently while increasing the rate of
“first-visit resolution.” And that benefits all stakeholders — technicians,
schedulers, and customers.

3. Life cycle prediction

The data that develops best practices for technicians can also develop
predictions. IoT and usage-based preventative maintenance is great, but right
now it’s still inherently reactive. AI can analyze so many more factors —
customer history, recall information, temperatures, humidity, asset location,
and so on — to accurately predict issues before they happen. A life cycle for a
product could emerge in which, say, an order is automatically generated for that
ice maker to be serviced in the next three months since the data says the
product tends to break down during that timeframe. How much more satisfied will
customers be if you reach out to them in anticipation of a breakdown rather than
waiting for a frustrated call after the fact? AI will finally fulfill its
promise of being predictive and proactive.

4. Scheduling

Imagine this predictive ability extending to the weather. AI notices that storms
will roll in next week and shuffles schedules accordingly — which can mean
adjusting travel time based on weather and traffic conditions. We see a
technician at work whenever we open Google Maps and Waze. That’s all pretty
straightforward now. But what if AI could match a technician’s skillsets with
the skillsets that may be needed for a particular job? This disparate
information — weather, traffic, skillsets, customer needs — will, when crunched
by AI, improve field-service scheduling. The right technician can show up at the
right place at a precise time, rain or shine.

The view of the future is this: AI and IoT will integrate humans and machines to
make both more efficient, responsive, and customer-oriented. And, contrary to
fears, AI won’t replace human technicians. They’ll become more efficient,
certainly, but the “people” component of field service is something that will be
enhanced by AI. We’ll see a networking of technicians and the machines they work
on, facilitated by AI and the data it uses.

That not only means improved efficiency, but also better cross-sell and up-sell
opportunities. If we know a certain type of switch is less reliable than another
type of switch for a particular customer, we can use AI to suggest that better
part. Because field service is no longer just about fixing and maintaining, it
now offers the technician the opportunity to build a relationship with the
customer — and to become a trusted adviser.

What that adds up to is the transformation of traditional field service into a
customer-oriented, wait-free industry. Maybe someday it’ll even have its own
holiday.

Michael Chou is the VP of Product Management at Salesforce Service Cloud.


VB Recommendations Walmart cancels every Super NES Classic Edition preorder
Frontier Developments announces expo celebrating Elite: Dangerous and Planet
Coaster How an open source framework will help AI reach the masses

Upcoming VentureBeat Events BLUEPRINT Sept 11 - 13 GamesBeat 2017 Oct 5 - 6 VB
Summit Oct 23 – 24



AIGUEST How an open source framework will help AI reach the masses HOVHANNES
AVOYAN, PICSARTJULY 26, 2017 12:10 PM

Image Credit: Shutterstock The rapid development of AI is like the birth of the
universe right after the Big Bang: incredibly hot and expanding rapidly. AI is
so dynamic that no one can predict what the field will be like in five years.
Based on its current development, we believe that we will witness the
standardization of models and frameworks and potentially the creation of a
marketplace for AI models.

Here’s why: Machine learning (ML) models have become the core of most modern
software because of their ability to adapt in numerous ways and their high
efficiency, both in terms of product functions and implementation costs and the
overall business itself. We can compare this stage of AI development with the
early days of the internet, when everyone acknowledged its importance but didn’t
see its full potential. Of course, it presents the same risks as the dot-com
bubble, but ultimately that crisis proved to be beneficial in terms of pushing
the further development of the tech industry overall.

As the AI industry is brand new, most companies leading the field have
open-sourced their ML models to protect their dominance and set the rules for
the market. Such an open source initiative provides an efficient way to get the
most out of hardware capabilities and allows developers to collaborate and share
their machine learning models in a unified fashion.

If the trend develops further in this way, new standards and platforms will
emerge, like popular deep learning frameworks TensorFlow (Google), Caffe2
(Facebook), and PyTorch (community, Facebook), along with higher level platforms
like parl.ai (Facebook) for conversational AI.

This approach helps integrate ML models/learning algorithms into software to
reduce time spent on routine coding. Developers using these frameworks can do
high-level coding for their products directly, which would solve many problems
with deployment and hardware compatibility. It’s important to add that
collaborative development of AI frameworks is beneficial for many companies
because the intellectual property is not in the software itself, but in the
models that they are built on. More engineers building better software will
allow better infrastructure and better models to be built — and those models are
where the value for software companies lies.

So, an open source framework approach will bring industry standardization.
Today, software engineering involves integrating a lot of third-party logic
blocks that work together to produce a solution for a given problem. Making ML
models composable with hard-coded logic blocks into one differentiable stack is
a very possible outcome of what our future software might look like it terms of
unification of the market. We will see less hard-coded logic and more models in
apps, like conversational interfaces for users. We will also see frameworks
integrating different models into new apps. For example, an object segmentation
model can be connected with an image transformation model to provide unique
image filters. Or a voice recognition model can be connected with a bot model to
manipulate it.

This world of new models being developed every day creates a demand for an
efficient way to share, collaborate on, and distribute these models to empower
many new and existing businesses using AI. New ML model marketplaces, where
developers can share ML models and quickly tailor them to their needs, will
emerge to create value for many kinds of businesses. Traditional software
businesses will radically change, providing even more jobs for data scientists
than the industry has now. Bearing all this in mind, it is clear that AI is the
future of software engineering, as well as a new marketplace and an opportunity
for various consulting services.

Hovhannes Avoyan is the cofounder and CEO of PicsArt, an image library.
