+++
title = "Five tips to write a data analysis plan"
date = "1990-03-29"
draft = true
tags = [
    "Data",
    "Analysis",
    "Planning"
]
+++

- TODO:
  http://www.analyticbridge.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/5-tips-how-to-write-data-analysis-plan

5 Tips How to Write Data Analysis Plan Posted by Janet Anthony on October 24,
2016 at 9:00amView Blog

With a data analysis plan, you know what you’re going to do when you actually
sit down to do the analysis of the data you’ve gathered. It’s a vitally
important thing for you to have, as it will guide how you’re going to collect
your data. After all, it’s very difficult to add in new variables afterward. For
that reason, you want to make sure you’ve created your plan beforehand so that
you can be sure that you’re asking all the questions you need to and you know
what you’re going to do. Sure, as they say, a plan only lasts until the first
shot is fired. And yes, that’s also true in data analysis. Nonetheless, having a
good plan can save you a great deal of time, while having a bad one (or even
worse, none at all) at best means you’ll be struggling to make sense of the data
and at worst will make you realize your data is worthless as you forgot to
collect a crucial variable. To make sure your plan rocks, follow these hints and
tips. Work out how many people you need As they say, you need a minimum of about
20 participants per cell to register any kind of effect. So if you’re doing a 2
X 2 design (Which is really quite common) you’ll need at least 80 participants.
So if you’re looking for a gender effect (which is the first ‘2’) and you expect
it to be moderated by whether they went to college or not (the other ‘2’) you’ve
got yourself a good old 2 X 2 design and will need at least 80 participants.
And, truth be told, that still will mean you’ll miss most of the time. A much
better bet is to go with double that number per cell. More if you’ve got the
time and the inclination. In that way, you’ll be far more likely to actually
find some kind of an effect. And that’s a good thing, as it’s far more fun to
find something as that will give you something to write about (and possibly
might give you a reason to publish). Draw up the tables and figures you want
Some people think it’s silly to draw up dummy tables, seeing as they don’t have
any statistics. I disagree. The tables and the figures can be immensely helpful
in that they can unearth assumptions that you may be making in your model that
you weren’t aware of. And that’s vital, as these assumptions might lead you down
the garden path if not addressed, leading to your data collection not creating
any significant results, because you forgot to measure some dimension or because
you didn’t think carefully enough about what was going on. So draw up the
figures and don’t just put nonsense into them. Instead, try to draw them up in a
realistic manner and work out what you would need for them to work out in that
way. Chances are, that will help a lot. Map out all your variables Go crazy.
Write down everything that might in some way be related to the variables you
want to collect. You think hair color might affect IQ? Then write it down. You
think pet ownership might play a role in how creative people are? Write it down.
Go a little bit crazy if you have to. Think laterally (something that will help
you improve your writing and be more creative besides) Now, the best thing you
can do is write down the connection, the direction and the role of these
variables. If you want to do it really well, make sure you quote sources where
such a connection has been previously established. That will make it easier, in
the end, to choose which variables you actually want to include in your design.
Of course, you won’t be able to measure them all, but you’ll thank yourself for
putting everything and the kitchen sink on paper as you’ll often realize you’ll
need a variable that you might otherwise have ignored. And these can be life
savers if the effect doesn’t work as well as you hoped and you’ve got these
extra variables to suck some of the variability out of your dependent variable.
Think about mediators and moderators Yes, I know, it’s hard to know the
difference between the two.In short, mediators are essential, while moderators
you can do without. So when I go to the bar, the number of drinks I have there
will decide my hangover. If I went to the bar and didn’t drink anything, there
wouldn’t be a hangover. Therefore a number of drinks are a mediator. The number
of friends that go with me to the bar, on the other hand, will only influence
how much I drink. Therefore, they’re a moderator. I can still get hungover
without them, but the more mates are there, the drunker I’ll likely become. You
want to make sure you map these out as best as possible before you start in on
your analysis and your data collection. Personally, I’ll often draw several
different models, with arrows pointing this way and that. In this way, I can see
what goes through where and why I think that’s the case. Then, afterward, you
can try your main model as well as some of the alternative models. Make sure you
granulate your variables A lot of people seem to think that the best variables
are yes or no, on or off, 0 or 1. Those variables are terrible as there is near
to no granulation in them. It’s much better to have a variable which you can
measure on a scale (from 1 to 7 normally). Why? Because in doing so, you’re
creating far more nuance and allowing a much bigger chance that if your effect
is real you’ll actually find something. Why? Think of it like this. If I divide
hair color into ‘blond’ and ‘not’ that costs me a heck of a lot of variation.
I’m grouping together the dirty blonds with the angel-haired blonds and the
redheads with the blackheads. Wouldn’t it be much better if I granulated the
affair from really light to really dark? Then the graduation is much smoother
and I’m far more likely to find an effect if it is there. For that reason, give
yourself as big of a chance as possible by having a scale for your dependent
variable (and for your independent variables as well, while you’re at it). Last
words A good data plan can save your research. And it’s not even that hard to
draw up. Just sit down and think logically about what you’re measuring and why,
as well as where it belongs in your design. In this way, you can avoid the
errors before they happen. And that’s important, as it can be incredibly hard to
fix them afterward. I kid you not, I’ve seen so many students collect data, only
to realize afterward that they forgot their most important variable and that the
data they collected was absolutely useless. They could have avoided that (and
all the extra work of having to collect the data again) if they’d drawn up a
better data plan and been better prepared. So don’t be one of those people. Draw
up a plan. You’ll thank me for it. About the Author: My name is Janet. I am a
freelance writer and content manager at BestEssay.Education. My motto is “What
you do today can improve all your tomorrows”.
