+++
title = "The 9 best marketing analytics and sales analytics you should know about"
date = "1990-03-29"
draft = true
tags = [
    "Marketing",
    "Analytics"
]
+++

Sales and marketing analytics are essential to unlocking commercially relevant
insights, increasing revenue and profitability, and improving brand perception.
With the help of the right analytics, you can uncover new markets, new audience
niches, areas for future development and much more. Let’s look at what I believe
are the best and most important sales and marketing analytics that can help any
business grow and succeed. This post builds on my article on the key business
analytics tools, which might make good additional background reading.

Unmet need analytics Business is all about meeting the needs of customers. Unmet
need analytics is the process of uncovering whether there are any unmet needs
around your product or service or within your market which you could meet to
increase customer satisfaction and revenue. Useful tools for unmet need
analytics include product reviews, qualitative surveys, focus groups and
interviews. You could also use tools like Google Trends to help identify what
customers are searching for. Tip: It is now very cheap and fast to ask your
customers questions. Create forums and online focus groups, or invite customers
to like your Facebook page and join a feedback group. Market size analytics If
you don’t understand the size and potential of your market you can easily jump
to conclusions about how viable your business proposition is. Market size
analytics is the process of working out how large the market is for your
products and services, and whether there is sufficient growth potential. The
size of the market is measured in terms of volume (how many units sold), value
(money spent in that market) or frequency (how often a product or service is
sold). Useful data includes government data, trade association data, financial
data from competitors, and customer surveys. Tip: Just because a market is large
doesn’t mean it’s profitable – especially if most of the customers that want a
particular product or service already have one and are unlikely to want another.
Demand forecasting Understanding demand is essential in order to remain
competitive. Demand forecasting is an area of predictive analytics that seeks to
estimate the quantity of a product or service your consumers are likely to buy.
It goes beyond educated guesses and looks at historical sales data or current
data from test markets. Analytic techniques such as time series analysis can be
very useful here. Tip: The data that you use for demand forecasting must be
clean and accurate. If it is not then the results will always be skewed and
could lead you down the wrong path. Market trend analytics Every business needs
to know the direction its market is heading in. Market trend analytics is a
process of establishing whether a market is growing, stagnant or in decline and
how fast that movement is occurring. Understanding market size is important but
knowing whether that market is trending up or down is also vital. To monitor
market trends you can run business experiments or scenario analysis to see what
the market would look like and how it would impact your business in either a
growing, stagnating or growth market. Customer surveys and focus groups can also
help. Tip: Stay mindful of the external environment, such as changes to
legislation and social expectations. Non-customer analytics Traditionally we’ve
been told that we need to understand our customers so that we know what they
look like and can find more people like them. And whilst that makes sense there
is another group that could be even more important – the non-customer!
Non-customer analytics is about understanding what people who are currently not
your customers think about your product, services or brand. By identifying who
is not buying from you (and why), you can expand your market to include those
individuals. If you want to know why people are not buying your product or
service, you need to ask them: interviews, questionnaires and focus groups can
help. Tip: It can be remarkably easy to get feedback from people who are not
your customers using the power of social media. Competitor analytics Your
business does not exist in a vacuum. Competitor analytics is important for
marketing and strategic planning by identifying who your real competitors are,
and how they are positioned in the market and in relation to your business. By
understanding their strengths and weaknesses you can identify opportunities to
exploit and threats to navigate. There are many ways of gathering competitor
data, such as business journals and newspapers, annual reports, product
brochures and marketing activity. You could even have an employee, friend or
family member buy a product or service from your key competitors and assess
their experience. Tip: The most useful tip for competitor analytics is to do it!
Sadly, most businesses don’t. Pricing Analytics What if you could find out
exactly how much your customers would pay for your product ahead of time?
Pricing analytics is the process that delivers that outcome. In short, it
involves analysing price sensitivity in market segments and is especially useful
in highly competitive markets where everything that can be done has been done.
Pricing analytics requires data mining and the development of forecasting models
and algorithms. It also often involves multiple, concurrent business experiments
that can be run quickly and easily so you can measure what is likely to happen
with each price change. Tip: If you use pricing analytics to improve revenue,
make sure you improve the value you add to customers that are paying a little
more. Marketing And Sales Channel Analytics
There are literally hundreds of possible channels and ways to market and sell your products and services.Marketing and sales channel analytics allows you to assess the different channels available to you and establish which are the most effective. It is likely you will reach different segments of your market via different channels but is it still good to know which ones are working and which are less effective. For each of your current marketing and sales channels and any potential as yet unused channels you will need to set some conversion rate goals so you know what you want that channel to deliver.
Tip: Marketing and sales channel analytics is obviously easier online than
offline. Online channels are digital and often the analytics are built into the
marketing and sales platforms. Brand analytics Brands matter. Brand analytics
seeks to determine the strength of your brand compared to your competitors. Your
brand is more than just your logo and your commercial livery – it’s the look and
feel of your products and what they represent to your customers. It’s important
to really understand how customers perceive your brand as this will impact your
decision making and strategic direction. You can source this sort of data
anywhere your customers and potential customers are discussing your brand, such
as customer service conversations, sales conversations, online forums, blogs,
review sites, and social media. Tip: The internet is a rich source of
information regarding how people feel about your brand and your business. People
love to share so tap into this rich vein of information.
