
# Putting it all together

- Kent Beck

Now you have all the pieces of the puzzle. You've learned the refactorings.
You've studied the catalog. You've practiced all of the checklists. You've
gotten good at testing, so you aren't affraid. Now you may think you know how to
refactor. Not yet.

The list of techniques is only the beginning. It is the gate you must pass
through. Without the techniques, you can't manipulate the design of running
programs. With them, you still can't, but at least you can start.

Why are all these wonderful techniques reallyonly the beginning? Because you
don't yet know when to use them and when not to, when to start and when to stop,
when to g and when to wait. It is the rhythm that makes the refactoring, not the
individual notes.

How will you know when you are really getting it? You'll know when you start to
calm down. When you feel absolute confidence that no matter how screwed up
someone left it, you can make the code better, enough better to keep making
progress.

Mostly, though, you'll know you're getting it when you can stop with confidence.
Stopping is the strongest move in the refactorer's repertoire. You see a big
goal --a host of subclass can be eliminated. You begin on move toward that goal,
each step small and sure, each step backed up by keeping all the tests running.
You're getting close. You only have two methods to unity in each of the
subclasses, and then they can go away.

That's when it happens. You run out of gas. Maybe it's getting late and you are
becoming fatigued. Maybe you were wrong in the first place and you can't really
get rid of all of those subclasses. Maybe you don't have the tests to back you
up. Whatever the cause, your confidence is gone. You can't make the next step
with certainty. You don't think you will screw anything up, but you're not sure.

That's when you stop. If the code is already better, integrate and release what
you've done. If it isn't better, walk away. Flust it. Glad to have learned a
lesson, pity it didn't work out. What's on for tomorrow?

Tomorrow or the next day or the next month or maybe even next year (my personal
record is nine years waiting for the second half of a refactoring), the insight
comes. Either you understand why you were wrong, or you understnd why you were
right. In any case, the next step is clear. You take the step with the
confidence you had when you started. Maybe you're even a little abashed at how
stupid you could have been not to have seen it all along. Don't be. It happens
to everyone.

It's a little like walking along a narrow trail above a one-thousand-foot drop.
As long as the light holds, you can step forward cautiously but with confidence.
As soon as the sun sets, though, you'd better stop. You bed down for the night,
sure the sun will rise again in the morning.

This may sounds mystical and vague. In a sense it is, because it is new kind of
relationship with your program. When you really understand refactoring, the
desing of the system is a fluid and plastic and modable to you as the individual
characters in a source code file. You can feel the whole design at once. You can
see how it might flex and change --a little this way and this is possible, a
little that way and that is possible.

In another sense, though, it is not all mystical or vague. Refactoring is a
learnable skill, the components of which you have read about in this book and
begun to learn about. You get those little skills together and polished. Then
you begin to see development in a new light.

I said this was a learnable skill. How do you learn it?

- **Get used to picking a goal**. Somewhere your code smells bad. Resolve to get rid
  of the problem. Then march toward that goal. You aren't refactoring to pursue
  truth and beauty (at least that's not all the is to it). You are trying to
  make your world easier to understand, to regain control of a program that is
  flapping loose.

- **Stop when you are unsure**. As you move toward your goal, a time may come
  when you can't exactly prove to yourself and others that what you are doing
  will preserve the semantics of your program. Stop. If the code is already
  better, go ahead and release your progress. If it isn't, thow away your
  changes.

- **Backtrack**. The discipline of refactoring is hard to learn and easy to lose
  sigh of, even if only for a moment. I still lose sigh more often than I care
  to admit. I'll do two or three or four refactorings in a row without retunning
  the test cases. Of course I can get away with it. I'm confident. I've
  practiced. Boom! A test fails, and I can't see which of my changes caused the
  problem.

At this moment you will be mightily tempted to just debug your way out of
trouble. After all, you got those tests to run in the first place. How hard
could it be to get them running again? Stop. You are out of control, and you
have no idea what it will take to get back in control by going forward. Go back
to your last known good configuration. Replay your changes one by one. Run the
tests after each one.

This may sound obvious here in the comfort of your recliner. When you are
hacking and you can smell a big simplification centimeters away, it is the
hardest thing to do to stop and back up. But think about it now, whie your head
is clear. If you have refactored for an hour, it will take only about ten
minutes to replay what you did. So you can be guaranteed to be back on track in
ten minutes. If, however, you try to move forward, you might be debugging for
five seconds or for two hours.

It is easy for me to tell you what to do now. It is brutally hard to actually do
it. I think my personal record for failing to follow my own advice is four hours
and three separate tries. I got out of control, backtracked, moved forward
slowly at first, got out of control again, for four painful hours. It is no fun.
That's why ou need help.

- **Duets**. For goodness' sake, refactor with someone. There are many
  advantages to working in pairs for all kinds of development. The advantages
  work in spades for refactoring. In refactoring there is a premium on working
  carefully and methodically. Your partner is there to keep you moving step by
  step, and you are there for him or her. In refactoring there is a premium on
  seeing possibly far-ranging consequences. Your partner is there to see things
  you don't see and know thing you don't know. In refactoring, there is a
  premium on knowing when to quit. When your partner doesn't understand what you
  are doing, it is a sure sign that you don't either. Above all, in refactoring
  there is an absolute premium on quite confidence. Your partner is there to
  gently encourage you when you might otherwise stop.

Another aspect of working with a partner is talking. You want to talk about what
you think is about to happen, so the two of you are pointed in the same
direction. You want to talk about what you think is happening, so you can spot
trouble as soon as possible. You want to talk about what just happened, so
you'll know better next time. All that talking, cements in your mind exactly
where the individual refactorings fit into the rhythm of refactoring.

You are likely to see new possibilities in your code, even if you have worked
with it for years, once you know about the semlls and the refactorings that can
sterilize them. You may even want to jump in and clean up every problem in
sight. Don't. No manager wants to hear the team say it has to stop for three
months to clean up the mess it created. And, well, they shouldn't. A big
refactoring is a recipe for disaster.

As ugly as the mess looks now, discipline yourself to nibble way at the problem.
When you are going to add some new functionality to an area, take a few minutes
to clean it up first. If you have to add some tests before you can clean up with
confidence, add them. You'll be glad you did. Refactoring first is less
dangerous than adding new code. Touching the code will remind you how it works.
You'll get done faster, and you'lll have the satisfaction of knowing that the
next time you pass this way, the code will look better than it did this time.

Never forget the two hats. When you refactor, you will inevitably discover cases
in which the code doesn't work right. You'll be absolutely certain of it. Resist
temptation. When you are refactoring, your goal is to leave the code computing
exactly the same answers it was when you found it. Nothing more, nothing less.
Keep a list (I always have an index card beside my computer) of things to change
later --test cases to add or change, unrelated refactorings, documents to write,
diagrams to draw. That way you won't lose those thoughts, but you won't let them
mess up what you are doing now.
