+++
title = "How to set team goals as a team"
date = "1990-03-29"
draft = true
tags = [
    "Goals",
    "Team"
]
+++

- TODO: http://blog.usenotion.com/how-to-set-team-goals-as-a-team

# How to set team goals as a team

Posted by Kasey Jones on Mon, Apr 24, 2017 Getting a team motivated is
challenging in itself, but we've all read and heard that setting goals for your
team is a critical component. When goals and objectives seem to come down from
on high without involving the people tasked with achieving them in the process,
it can be downright excruciating. Incorporating your team into the process of
team goal setting can be the critical difference between frustration,
resentment, or apathy and motivation, excitement, and a sense of teamwork.

Team Goals Setting and Team Metrics.jpg

What Setting Team Goals Shouldn't Look Like

Those two dreaded words: Group Project

Maybe your school days are long behind you, maybe you’re still chasing your
first (or second) degree. Anyone who’s spent a significant amount of time in the
classroom might cringe over the thought of revisiting the group project dynamic.
We all have horror stories, and occasionally we might have even the reason for
the uneven workload.

The situation is usually the same: one or two people brainstorm some ideas and
decide what the final project will look like. Those same people do 80% of the
work - maybe another couple people chip in, when they show up to class. It
seemed like there was one more person but no one has seen or heard from them in
weeks.

Team Goals Setting Gone Wrong.png

Sound about right?


Even worse: A sales pitch

Another mistake is making the goal setting process “seem” interactive. The scene
is familiar; everyone has blocked off their calendar, the coffee has been poured
and the conference room looks akin to a modern day knights of the round table.
No one is leaving until we make it through all the items on the agenda. The only
problem? The goals were actually set at a leadership meeting last week and the
real aim of this meeting is to “sell” the team on it.

Both of the above scenarios are the absolute wrong way to approach team goal
setting.

So how can we ensure we are setting team goals effectively and with everyone's
genuine participation?


Setting Team Goals starts with your vision

When your team members have a deep understanding of what the company is trying
to achieve, they can make decisions through that lens. Rather than having to
critique and micromanage every decision a person makes, they become empowered to
do what’s needed to reinforce the values of the company and the team.

I’m not talking about putting posters around the office with words like
“collaboration” or “synergy.” Instead, communicate to your team what value the
company is delivering for its customers and how everyone together is going to do
their part. This should be something that starts during the hiring process and
is ingrained into every decision made within the organization from the bottom
up.

Essentially, who are you to your customers and what makes you unique? If we
asked ten people in your company that, how similar do you think their answers
would be?


Set meaningful team goals

Allow individuals and teams to set their own goals which help the company get
closer to achieving its mission. Although senior leadership plays a critical
role in company-wide objectives, goal setting should be an interactive process.
Team goal setting allows the members to identify what positive results toward
company objectives that the team can control. This gives everyone a sense of
teamwork, cameraderie and that we're all in this together. The more we can
involve people in the process of determining what they need to accomplish, the
more committed they will be to actually achieving the desired results. It also
gives them valuable insight into the process of defining company and team
strategies and how these types decisions are made.


Track progress toward team goals

To summarize the exchange between Alice and the Cheshire cat, “If you don’t know
where you’re going, any road will get you there.”

It’s critical that the goals you set as a team are well defined and easy to
understand. Things like “sell more” or “build that new feature faster” are not
helpful or motivating; clear, concise goals are. Make goals specific and
measurable so we can understand which metrics to track to tell us whether we
achieved them. This isn’t to say that goals have to be so specific and rigid
that they can’t be adapted over time as situations change. (For more on
different goal setting methodolgoies; read more here.)

Need help setting goals as a team? Download our free guide to Getting Started
with Team Metrics and get it done together in 3 short meetings.

As we covered in a previous post, make sure to identify critical team success
metrics. With so many priorities and numbers to track, it can feel like we’re
being pulled in many directions at once. By spending more of our time on the top
2-3 metrics for our role, everyone will be focused on the activities that will
have the biggest impact.

Sharing is Caring - Especially when it comes to Team Goals

Just as important as defining our team goals and the metrics we'll use to gauge
our progress, we need to ensure we are sharing and collaborating on them too. If
we aren’t regularly monitoring and discussing our progress toward these goals,
we are leaving food (money, opportunity, lines of code) on the table. Too often
time passes, excitement fades and goals go untracked. What started with zeal has
now fallen to the wayside with other ghosts of failed initiatives past.

Rather than tasking each individual with tracking their goals or making it
another one of the manager's administrative responsibilities (which I’ve spent
way too many hours of my life doing,) set up an easy to access central location
where everyone can set and monitor individual and team goals. This doesn’t mean
we need to share every possible number available, rather share the key data that
has a direct impact on the team.

Communicate, communicate, communicate

Beyond just setting up a team goal and metrics dashboard, make it a constant
topic of conversations in meetings and a reference point when questions about
these goals come up. These metrics should be reviewed by each team member and
the manager regularly - if not every day, at least every week. It doesn’t need
to be a 9am status meeting but briefly review and communicate any red flags via
Slack (or however makes sense for your team.)

One-on-one’s will be off to a much faster start if we aren’t spending the first
five to ten minutes comparing spreadsheets. We can quickly pull up our goals,
review how we are tracking toward them and dive into the key metrics. These
meetings are a great place to coach around any numbers that need work and give
some praise for those that look good.

Continue to reinforce this process by bringing up the goals at the start of
every team meeting. With everyone on the same page, this is a great time to
identify specific challenges and come up with potential strategies for fixing
them. Dedicate five or ten minutes of each team meeting to brainstorming ideas
around one of your team goals.

Additionally, use these goals as your rubric for evaluating new projects or
initiatives. Will this work get us closer to our goals or serve as a
distraction? Be ruthless! If an idea isn’t in line with individual, team, or
company goals, sideline it for a later date. You will stay more focused and
ultimately accomplish more in the long term.

Team Goals should empower cross-functional alignment

A little heavy on the buzzwords there, but basically, are our team goals and
objectives aligned with the overall company goals?

It’s important to focus on our team's goals, but leadership also needs to
confirm that our success within the team is leading to broader success within
the company. Make these same team goals a regular part of the conversation when
meeting with senior leadership or peers in other business units.

Having the data and having access to it will only benefit us if we make data a
regular part of our discussions and decision making process.

Celebrate Meaningful Results

Celebrate Team Goal Setting.jpg

In the context of team goal setting, being able to show meaningful results and
provide recognition for achieving them is of the utmost importance. If we are
going to merely gloss over this part and send them a gift card, we are doing a
disservice to our company and our people. By involving each person in the goal
setting process, we have already helped them create meaningful goals aligned
with our mission. Finding meaning in the goals will in itself increase the
satisfaction of working towards them. However once they have achieved the goals,
it’s a perfect opportunity for us to demonstrate how important our values are
and what it means to us that our team has gone the extra mile. This isn’t to say
that everyone gets a gold Rolex for doing their job, but it does mean that if
you want these goals to be important to your team, show them they are just as
important to you.
