+++
title = "Innovation is as much about finding partners as building products"
date = "1990-03-29"
draft = true
tags = [
    "Innovation",
    "Product"
]
+++

- TODO: http://www.7wdata.be/big-data/innovation-is-as-much-about-finding-partners-as-building-products/

# Innovation is as much about finding partners as building products

This is an incredible moment for innovation. Previously unthinkable
opportunities to reinvent complex, established industries are now being made
possible by the convergence of cloud computing, new analytical tools, and the
data flowing from a host of new sensors in the physical world. To revolutionize
old industries, small and big companies alike must get past competitive angst
and embrace their strengths and weaknesses. Such collaboration can take many
shapes. These are new, unique partnership models in which corporations bring
assets, the ability to rapidly test and scale, and a deep understanding of the
regulatory landscape. Startups inject new technical expertise, and venture
capitalists offer funding and access to new talent. To seize the opportunity
before us, collaboration across the economy must become universal. Yesterday’s
model of innovation is no longer adequate – instead, the entire ecosystem must
work together. Smart companies, founders, and investors that recognize this have
a far better shot at making history, rather than running the risk of becoming a
footnote to it.

Have you ever stopped to ponder the true complexities involved with trying to
create a viable, safe, autonomous vehicle? The innovation alone is a herculean
task, but imagine being that upstart pioneer trying to develop the technology,
while at the same time going up against entrenched, powerful competitors with
deep industry knowledge, assets, and channels who’ve been around for a hundred
years or more.

Read Also: Apache Spark: A Unified Engine for Big Data Processing This is the
challenge for all kinds of disruptors, whether in the auto industry,
pharmaceuticals, service industries, or healthcare. The fact is, going it alone,
we believe, is simply not the way to go at all. Collaboration is the essential
new secret sauce for startups and industry leaders alike. For true disruption to
take hold, old and new must work together, playing to each other’s strengths.

This is an incredible moment for innovation. Previously unthinkable
opportunities to reinvent complex, established industries are now being made
possible by the convergence of cloud computing, new analytical tools, and the
data flowing from a host of new sensors in the physical world. Improbable
advances are now real possibilities.

Yet the requirements for innovation today are entirely different from those of
the last 30 years. The technology-driven disruption model that brought us
computing, the internet, and mobile apps is no longer sufficient. Transforming
our oldest industries calls for more than new technology; sophisticated
knowledge of regulations, testing protocols, and traditional physical assets are
now essential.

Read Also: Open data creates new business The inadequacies of the old approach
are evident in recent startup stumbles, even when the technology is sound. DNA
genetic testing company 23andMe fell behind on its communications with the FDA,
resulting in a temporary ban on marketing the company’s personal genetic
screening services to the public. It took more than two years for 23andMe to
secure a green light from the FDA to screen for 10 diseases, the first such
approval for a direct-to-consumer test.

A123 Systems promised to be a clean tech success with a soaring IPO in 2009. The
company developed lithium ion batteries that helped convince automakers of their
value for hybrid vehicles. But the startup could not keep pace with the
development and scale of established battery makers, and production defects led
to a $55 million recall in 2012 and contributed to the company’s bankruptcy
later that year. Acquired out of bankruptcy by a Chinese company to focus on the
burgeoning domestic market, A123 recently announced it will close its Michigan
plant as it winds down production of lithium-ion batteries in the U.S. and
shifts its local focus to engineering and testing.

Read Also: Do You Really Need A Chief AI Officer? Even an innovation pioneer
like Tesla took a harder path — the company’s reinvention of the automobile
meant a massive investment in non-core parts.
