+++
title = "The state and future of the AI market"
date = "1990-03-29"
draft = true
tags = [
    "AI"
]
+++

How has the AI industry developed so far and what have been the major milestones
in the AI industry?

The first thing you have to understand about AI is that it’s not the picture
most people have in their heads—robots acting like humans or taking over the
world. First, robots are a narrow vision of the “body” in which AI might be
present. The reality is that right now, your Amazon Echo, your smartphone, and
even your car’s antilock brake system is the “body” for AI. That leads to the
second point, once AI is developed, it quickly becomes rather mundane—part of
the background of our existence. AI powers every search we make, about half of
all stock trades, and the price of airplane tickets and hotel rooms.

AI will become a critical factor in the success and market share of most
companies CLICK TO TWEET In terms of market value, what is the ultimate
potential of the AI market?

Just how lucrative will this industry be to those who lead it? Beyond “huge”;
the potential of the AI market is hard to gauge because it will be interwoven
into the fabric of so many industries, B2B and B2C products and services. An
estimate of 15 billion in direct revenue (software, services, hardware) in 5
years would not surprise me.

In the longer term, AI will become a critical factor in the success and market
share of most companies. The difference between the AI haves and have-nots will
be akin to the difference between businesses which are online vs. only offline.

How do you think the AI industry will play out in the next five years?

The next five years are particularly exciting. AI is like a snowball rolling
down a hill and it’s finally big enough that we can see it easily and watch it
grow before our eyes. From our perspective, the breakthroughs in education alone
will be transformative. Our early tests are pointing to the feasibility of
vocabulary acquisition at a speed which is an order of magnitude faster than
what is currently available. And Lingvist isn’t the only company already using
AI to effectively tailor education around the skills and capabilities of an
individual learner. It’s ironic that one of the early successes of artificial
intelligence will be to advance human intelligence.

What are the implications of the AI industry becoming something that is
controlled by two or three dominant players? How will it influence innovation
and product development if AI algorithms are more widely distributed around the
world, rather than confined to those aforementioned tech behemoths?

In consumer and commercial applications there is a virtuous cycle in AI; AI
feeds on large data sets. If AI can provide a product advantage, which in turn
attracts larger user numbers, then it gets better and delivers greater product
advantage, and so on. For Lingvist specifically, we have a number of insights
now that would not have been possible without the size and activity of our
learner base. Among them: it takes about 17 hours to learn 2000 words; a
learner’s inherent knowledge before using Lingvist can be predicted fairly
easily by testing them on a handful of words — and perhaps most revealing, the
actual “forgetting curve” as pioneered by Hermann Ebbinghaus (and used by a
number of AI education applications) does not fit Ebbinghaus’ original
mathematical model — our data implies a substantially different equation is a
much better match.

Because of the feedback loop and competitive advantage granted by AI, there is
some danger of consolidation among a handful of players. The barrier to entry
for someone who doesn’t possess access to a large data set could become
formidable.

However, given the players involved, it’s quite likely that one or more will
provide AI as a Service (AIaaS)- Amazon very likely, and quite possibly Google
as well. This could actually be a powerful enabler of innovation and diverse
applications—similar to the way AWS enabled a host of startup companies by
providing cloud based, affordable hosting.
