+++
title = "Why the explosion of AI can no longer be ignored by businesses"
date = "1990-03-29"
draft = true
tags = [
    "Artificial Intelligence",
    "Businesses"
]
+++

- TODO: http://www.cbronline.com/news/internet-of-things/cognitive-computing/explosion-ai-can-no-longer-ignored-businesses/

# Why the explosion of AI can no longer be ignored by businesses

Discussions around Artificial Intelligence (AI) have proliferated and will
continue to over the next year. Businesses are beginning to see its value in a
wide range of sectors, while a different report is released every day that
instils a fear that AI will replace workers’ jobs. Simply put there is no hiding
the explosion of AI and its applications; in the UK, Durham police have begun
trialling a system that will classify suspects as low, medium or high risk and
help officers review their sentence.

As AI, automation and machine learning push the boundaries in almost every
single industry, businesses will have to embrace the technology and understand
that it is a force for good. This article will explore the perception around AI,
the practical uses of the technology and the overall objective that businesses
should be preparing for.

AI will completely revolutionise businesses, but is crucially a force for good

While it’s true that AI will change how businesses operate, business leaders
should consider it with optimism and positivity. PwC conducted a study and found
that AI would help global GDP gain a huge $15.7 trillion, a 14% rise from 2016
to 2030. The detailed analysis found that the business impact of AI was so vast
that productivity would improve dramatically. 2030 might seem like a long time
away but in the business world preparation is key to everything.

As artificial intelligence becomes more and more integral to daily work
processes, the benefits will become much clearer. Automating simple tasks frees
up the workforce to focus on more intricate and exciting aspects of their role.
Take for example, innovative law firm Berwin Leighton Paisner. The UK based
company developed an entirely different business model that relies on an AI
system to work on certain property disputes.

The system extracts the raw data and checks the basic details needed to serve
legal notices to the corresponding property. The cost savings are clear, but the
sheer difference in time is quite substantial – a task that would usually take
workers weeks now can be done in minutes! And this using a simple process
automation approach to AI; future systems will do much more comprehensive tasks.

As businesses of all kinds look to invest in AI, the field itself will rapidly
evolve, making it almost impossible to keep up with ongoing developments.
Leaders should instead focus on their business and look to analyse how
artificial intelligence could benefit their organisation.



What AI can do right now – and advances are coming all the time

The application of Artificial Intelligence is quite broad and its technology is
positively developing, possibly quicker than businesses would have predicted.
From the sorting of information, to automated machines in the manufacturing
process, the capabilities are clearly broad enough that businesses are wasting
no time to invest.

Our own recent AI engine, Zinrai, has been used by Japanese company Kawasaki
Geological Engineering to accurately detect and prevent underground sinkholes
before they manifest. The technology uses deep learning technology to analyse
and process the volume of radar images collected with underground radar probe
equipment.

Businesses and governments could benefit from increased operating efficiency,
spot cavities in the road before they manifest and be able to ultimately prevent
sinkholes. Another fantastic example is a conversational tool that can be used
to analyse the sentiment of customer calls, therefore enabling the host to
tailor each conversation to the customer.

What’s clear is that AI is developing at a significant rate. However, we remain
at a relatively early stage and businesses must recognise that the true
potential won’t be achieved without advancement in the underlying technology.
For example, improvement in imagification (the process of converting business
data into images) will be vital in turning data into digestible problems that
machine learning can process. A rapid acceleration of the computational power
available, to support the training phase of machine learning, remains a priority
as well.

AI needs work but it's coming.

Why businesses should be planning for AI right now

The future is coming quickly and business cannot afford to ignore artificial
intelligence; it’s as simple as that. Technology will continue to disrupt
businesses and Artificial Intelligence will similarly impact every single
industry. What’s crucial is how prepared businesses are for artificial
intelligence, and that means giving it consideration now. It is imperative that
businesses become ‘digitally mature’ immediately, because only with digital,
well curated business data can the promise of AI be realised.

The implementation of smarter, AI supported business processes is an enabler for
the business, and will free up workers to focus on more complex and intelligent
tasks. Highly qualified staff are the backbone of any business and these people
should spend as little time as possible on repetitive, time-consuming tasks.

AI systems can complete (or mostly complete) these tasks more efficiently and
even more accurately. It’s all about identifying where people can create the
most value, then supporting other tasks or parts within machine learning
systems. Ultimately, the AI needs to become a member of the team, allowing their
human colleagues to focus on specialist activities.

The economic benefits are clear; AI could not only offer huge efficiency
savings, but unlock never before seen business capabilities. Improving the
quality of working lives and job satisfaction won’t only increase the business’s
operations, but allow them to focus on innovation by automating routine
processes.

What’s clear is that to thrive, businesses need to prepare their organisations
for artificial intelligence now. Upskilling the workforce, providing the
monetary investment and working with technology experts will be the only route
to success. The latter will be of vital importance as technology becomes
trickier and more complex, and understanding how, where and why to apply AI
solutions will become even more imperative for each business. AI is not a
solution that can be delivered ‘shrink wrapped’. It requires specialist skills
in both AI and in the business.



The role of AI is far too significant too ignore now

AI & Automation is too frequently perceived as bad for business processes, when
the focus should largely be on highly repetitive, time-consuming jobs. Releasing
workers from boring tasks actually enables them to focus on more important
aspects of their job. There is no denying that automation is quickly
approaching, and with the right preparation staff will be freer to focus on more
complex problems in the business.

Businesses will have to adapt and embrace digitally driven ideas that prepare
them for the future which will be technology driven. But we need a societal
debate about the consequences of a large scale AI deployment and must agree on a
set of rules and frameworks that we, as a society, apply to AI. In particular
education on all levels, re-skilling the existing work force and developing an
agreed plan to make sure that productivity can be transformed into a higher net
value, not just for single businesses but society as whole, will be crucial.

AI is growing at a rapid pace and the benefits are clear; after all a failure to
prepare will only lead to failure itself.
