
"Humans act like mortals in all that they fear, and as immortals in all that
they desire." —Seneca

"We will come up with unsupervised algorithms that will outperform every
supervised algorithm; but we haven't built them yet. " —Sutskever

"Intelligence is ten million rules." —Douglas Lenat

"Alan Turing told us we could make computers intelligent. Marvin Minsky told us
how to do it." —Winston

"Culture eats strategy for breakfast." —Drucker

"We have reached a stage where we often pursue growth for growth's sake, a
condition that in medical terms would simply be called cancer." —(?)

"When you adopt a tool, you also adopt the management philosophy embedded in
that tool." —Shirky

"You can measure an organization by the number of lies you need to tell to be
part of it." —Palmer

"Profit is like the air we breathe. We need air to live, but we don't live to
breathe." —Laloux

"People don't care about your failures and won't remember them. They care about
your successes." —Khosla

"There are two types of companies today. Those that have experienced a security
breach, and those that don't know it yet." —Howard Shrobe

"The difference between insanity and genius is measured only by success."
—Einstein

"Starting a company is like throwing yourself off the cliff and assembling an
airplane on the way down." —Hoffman

"La clave para [startups] es identificar un demanda que todavía no existe, pero
que posiblemente tenga un mercado enorme."

"Equipo inteligente, proactivo, autodidacta, es cuestión que de tiempo para que
sean un gran éxito." —Rubén Trejo

"Para ser emprendedores exitosos necesitan ser tontos y estar locos." —Seibel

"No importa no tener experiencia, importa que resuelvas los problemas de tus
clientes/consumidores y ellos son los que mejor saben cuáles son" —Seibel

"Crecimiento es lo que te da derecho a fondeo y a contratar, no al revés."
—Seibel

"Trata de no vender más de 10% de la empresa en la primera inversión." —Seibel

"CFO: 'What happens if we invest in our people and they leave?', CEO: 'What
happens if we don't and they stay?'"

"The business model behind the internet is surveillance." —Schneider

"Los emprendedores quieren innovar en cada decisión, y eso es un error. "
—Seibel

"The job of a startup is to question received ideas and think from scratch."
—Thiel

“Nunca rompas el silencio si no es para mejorarlo”, Ludwig van Beethoven

"The financial crisis is not about finance, it's about people." —(?)

"A rational agent can have preferences that the entire world views as being
against the agent's interest." —Rubinstein

"While conclusions reached by inductive inference are only probable, those
reached by deductive inference are conclusive." —Mood

"Nothing is holy in economic theory and everything is the creation of people
like yourself." —Rubinstein

"Inefficient regulation and corruption are two sides of the same coin." —Aidt

"Inequality is the source of all movement." —(?)

"They who can give up essential liberty to obtain a little temporary safety,
deserve neither liberty nor safety." —Benjamin Franklin

"La siguiente oración es falsa. La oración anterior es verdadera." —(?)

“No existe la libertad, sino la búsqueda de la libertad, y esa búsqueda es la
que nos hace libres.” —Carlos Fuentes

“My life seemed to be a series of events and accidents. Yet when I look back, I
see a pattern.” —Mandelbrot

“The only way to deal with an unfree world is to become so absolutely free that
you very existence is an act of rebellion.” —Camus

"No comparto lo que dices, pero defenderé hasta la muerte to derecho a decirlo."
—Voltaire

"Let me guess. You were working on a problem that involved human behavior and it
blew on your face!" —Larry (NUMB3RS)

"We ascribe beauty to that which is simple; which has no superfluous parts;
which exactly answers its end." —Emerson

"Cuando la tiranía es ley la revolución es orden." —(?)

"Nothing at all takes place in the universe in which some rule of maximum or
minimum does not appear." —Euler

"Seeing is not believing; believing is seeing! You see things, not as they are,
but as you are." —Butterworth

"When you change the way you look at things, the things you look at change."
—Dyer

"Teachers open the door. You enter by yourself." —Chinese proverb

"Simple things should be simple; complex things should be possible." —Kay

"We can decide between two options but, as human beings, we are condemned to
local minimums when it comes to relevant open-ended questions." —(?)

"If you empower people but don't give them informaiton, they just fumble in the
dark." —Vernon

"The fear of death follows from the fear of life. A man who lives fully is
prepared to die at any time." —Mark Twain

"Cuando los hombres de genio sublime trabajan poco es cuando son más activos."
—Da Vinci

"The true sign of intelligence is not knowledge, but imagination." —Einstein

"Be sure you put your feet in the right place, then stand firm." —Abraham
Lincoln

"The two most important days in your life are the day you were born and the day
you find out why." —Mark Twain

"The mind is everything. What you think you become." —Buddha

"And those who were seen dancing were thought to be insane by those who could
not hear the music." —Nietzsche

"We can not think of being acceptable to others until we have first proven
acceptable to ourserlves." —Malcom X

"It is in your moments of decision that your destiny is shaped. Choose now.
Choose well." —Robbins

"Quiet people have the loudest minds" —Hawking

"No hay nada más poderosos que una idea cuyo tiempo ha llegado." —Víctor Hugo

"It's only ideas and passion what can change the world." —Kurzweil

"A designer knows she has achieved perfection when there's nothing left to take
away." —Saint-Exupéry

"If I had more time, I would have written a shorter letter." —Pascal

"Simplicity doesn't precede complexity. It follows it." —Perlis

"Premature optimization is the root of all evil." —Knuth

"Without great solitude no serious work is possible." —Picasso

"The map is not the territory." —Korzybski

"¿Qué son las nubes? ¿Una arquitectura del azar? Quizá Dios las necesita para la
ejecución de Su infinita obra y son hilos de la trama oscura." —Borges

"To avoid criticism, say nothing, do nothing, be nothing." —Aristotle

"I'm unstoppable because I decide to be." —Robbins

"Know everything about something and something about everything." —Huxley

"Do or do not. There is no try." —Yoda

"Humans are incredibly power efficient. If you had limited AlphaGo to 50W, it
would have been creamed." —Nash

"If you are the smartest person in the room, you're in the wrong room." —(?)

"Fool me once... shame on you. Full me once; can't get fooled again." —Bush

"It is wonderful how much may be done if we are always doing.” —Jefferson

"An investment in knowledge pays the best interest." —Franklin

"By failing to prepare, you are preparing to fail." —Franklin

"Try not to become a man of success, bur rather try to become a man of value."
—Einstein

"Benditos los flexibles porque no se deformarán." —McGriffy

"No existe ningún motivo para pensar desde cero lo mismo dos veces, a menos que
nos guste pensarlo." —Allen

"No basta con tener visión; ha de combinarse con atrevimiento. No basta con
basta con mirar los peldaños; hemos de subir las escaleras." —(?)

"Las cosas rara vez se paralizan por falta de tiempo; se paralizan porque no se
ha definido cómo hacerlas." —Allen

"La preocupación constante e improductiva que experimentamos por todo lo que
tenemos que hacer es lo que más tiempo y energía consume." —(?)

"Piensa como hombre de acción; actúa como hombre de pensamiento." —Bergson

"We are the people we have been waiting for." —Navajo

"Re-examine all that you have been told... dismiss that which insults your
soul." —Whitman

"A man who dares to waste one hour of time has not discovered the value of
life." —Darwin

"No esperes que pase algo para que seas feliz; cuando seas feliz algo pasará."
—Omar Trejo

“Happiness is when what you think, what you say, and what you do are in
harmony.” —Gandhi

“Think before you speak. Read before you think.” —Lebowitz

"Los libros son libertad. Sin embargo, nadie puede ser obligado a ser libre."
—Kary Castolo

"Rather than love, money, faith, fame, and fairness, give me truth." —Into the
Wild

"What is everyday if not a series of conflicts between the right way and the
easy way?" —(?)

“Be the change you wish to see in the world.” —Gandhi

"When you complain you make yourself a victim. Leave the situation, change the
situation or accept it. All else is madness." —(?)

"What we can imagine depends on what we know." —(?)

"No es necesario decir todo lo que se piensa, lo que sí es necesario, es pensar
todo lo que se dice" —Quino

"Sometimes people think in either/or terms when they should be thinking in
both/neither terms." —(?)

"Chance favors the prepared mind" —Louis Pasteur

"God is the unanswerable perpetual question." —Omar Trejo

"Si te comparas, compárate con los mejores." —Omar Trejo

"You all laugh because I'm different. I laugh because you're all the same." —(?)

"Today I'll do what others won't so tomorrow I can do what others can't." —(?)

"El mundo cambia con tu ejemplo, no con tu opinión." —(?)

"Resourcefulness is the ultimate resource." —Robbins

"The harder I work, the luckier I get." —(?)

"Nothing happens to me; it happens because of me." —Cardone

"Without great solitude no serious work is possible." —Picasso

"The future has many names. For the weak, it's unattainable. For the fearful,
it's unknown. For the bold, it's ideal." —Victor Hugo

"Labels are for cans, not for people" —Coca Cola

"Para los negocios no necesitas escopetas, necesitas lásers" —Rubén Trejo

"It's very interesting to see how self-managing organizations and distributed
computational networks have so much in common." —Omar Trejo

"Never underestimate the power of a few committed people to change the world.
Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has." —Meade

"Do we have the right to know what they didn't consent to share, even when they
willingly shared the data that leads us there?" —Zona

"In a well tested system it's not unusual to have more lines of tests than you
have of product." —Batchelder

"There is surely nothing quite so useless as doing with great efficiency what
should not be done at all." —Drucker

"Our dependence on technology is growing faster than we can secure it. What
should we do about it?" —(?)

"A bug is a test case you haven't written yet". —Pilgrim

"The hardest thing about management is to make everyone else understand what you
understand." —(?)

"Most of the problems we can think of are incomputable. However, most of the
problems we actually think of are computable." —(?)

"You can’t use up creativity. The more you use, the more you have.” —Angelou

"If you have everything under control you are not going fast enough." —(?)

"Programming is a good job if you want to spend all of your time at the absolute
limit of your capacity to understand things." —@Pentadact

"The best ideas are common property" –Seneca

"Cuidado con los miedos; les encanta robar sueños." —(?)

"Do not follow where the path may lead. Go, instead, where there is no path and
leave a trail." —Emerson

"All models are wrong, but some are useful." —Box

"You don't need a mentor to excel —excel and you will get a mentor." —Sandberg

“We are more honest with search engines than with our families.” —Miko Hypponen

"Courage is contagious." —Assange

"Never let a good crisis go to waste" —McKinsey

"Los cambios que proponemos son posibles porque el país ha avanzado mucho, y son
necesarios porque no ha avanzado lo suficiente." —Camín

"I have not failed. I've just found 10,000 ways that won't work." —Edison

“If you aren’t willing to do what scares the crap out of you, then where does
the crap remain?” —Pavlina

"In time we'll most likely lose all our privacy." —Eric Schmidt

"This is the big leagues. When you make a mistake, you loose the right to play."
—(?)

"There has never yet been a man in our history who led a life of ease whose name
is worth remembering." —Roosevelt

"Does your mindset fit my dataset?" —(?)

"Progress isn't linear; it might not be apparent until after many long days of
hard work have accumulated." —Rosabeth Moss

"Think of passion as the fuel; skill is the vehicle you drive in." –Erika
Andersen

"It's lonely at the top." —(?)

"It's easier to move down hill than up hill, but the view is much better at the
top." —Wardbeecher

"Small things make greatness. One by one stacked up on each other." —Ray Lewis

"En México hay más dinero que proyectos." —Juan Saldivar

"México no es uno de los países más aptos para el emprendimiento porque
históricamente no nos hemos exigido hasta el límite." —César Salazar

"Being realistic is the most commonly traveled road to mediocrity." —Will Smith

"There's nothing worse than a sharp image of a fuzzy concept." —Adams

"You work on the most importat thing until it ships or until it's not the most
important thing" —Kent Beck

"El equipo de ingeniería debe tomar parte en las decisiones de producto, y debe
hablar directamente con los usuarios/clientes. No deben haber barreras." —Seibel

"If you must, mock at architectural frontiers."

"Marketing es responsabilidad del equipo de ingeniería." —Seibel

"Code is a liability not an asset. Less code is more maintainable." —Ravindran

"Make the change easy, and then make the easy change." —Martin

"You're extraordinary. There will be mediocre people who will resent you for
they stand in your shadow. Don't make yourself smaller to accommodate them.
Embrace your gift." —Anonymous
